Add deconvolution notebook text, part 1 (#1012)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: spatial/03-deconvolution.Rmd

## Objectives

- Use RCTD to perform reference-based deconvolution of Visium spots in doublet and full modes
- Visualize the spatial distribution of estimated cell type proportions across the osteosarcoma tissue
- Explore patterns of cell type co-occurrence across spots

## Introduction

> In this notebook, we'll continue working with the mouse osteosarcoma lung metastases sample from [Reinecke et al. (2025)](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0049) that we explored in spatial clustering notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this notebook, we'll continue working with the mouse osteosarcoma lung metastases sample from [Reinecke et al. (2025)](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0049) that we explored in the spatial clustering notebook.
```

> As we have discussed, each Visium spot captures the combined expression of approximately 5--20 cells, not a single cell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we have discussed, each Visium spot captures the combined expression of approximately 5-20 cells, not a single cell.
```

While the clustering analysis from the previous notebook identified groups of spots with similar transcriptional profiles, clustering alone cannot tell us which specific cell types are contributing to each spot's expression.
To move from spot-level expression to cell-type-level information, we can apply **deconvolution**, which decomposes each spot's bulk gene expression into contributions from different cell types and estimates their relative proportions.

Specifically, we'll perform deconvolution using RCTD (Robust Cell Type Deconvolution), which is available in the `spacexr` package ([Cable et al. 2022](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00830-w)).
RCTD uses maximum likelihood estimation to model each spot's expression as a weighted combination of reference cell type profiles, using a single-cell reference dataset.

> RCTD also accounts for "platform effects" between the reference dataset, which was sequenced with single-cell technology, and the query spatial transcriptomics dataset, as the differences in library preparation between these platforms can introduce artifactual differences between gene expression measurements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- RCTD uses a maximum likelihood estimation to model each spot's expression as a weighted combination of reference cell type profiles, using a single-cell reference dataset.

- RCTD also accounts for "platform effects" between the reference dataset, which was sequenced with single-cell technology, and the query spatial transcriptomics dataset, as the differences in library preparation between these platforms can introduce artifactual differences between gene expression measurements.
```

Maybe just add some bullets to break up the paragraphs here?

As with reference-based cell type annotation on single-cell data, it's critical for deconvolution to use a reference dataset that contains the cell types you expect to find in your data.
Here, we'll use the [OsteoCAR reference](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.01.13.698472v3), a single-cell atlas for osteosarcoma that has been divided into "sub-references" for human and mouse samples, as well as for primary and metastatic samples.
We'll specifically use the mouse metastasis-specific portion of this reference, which we expect will be a reasonably good match to our Visium sample which is also from a mouse osteosarcoma lung metastasis. 

## Set up

> To begin, we'll load the packages we'll use throughout this notebook and setting the random seed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, we'll load the packages we'll use throughout this notebook and set the random seed.
```

## Set up

To begin, we'll load the packages we'll use throughout this notebook and setting the random seed.

```{r libraries}
# The main class we use for spatial transcriptomic data
suppressPackageStartupMessages({
  # The main class we use for spatial transcriptomic data
  library(SpatialExperiment)
  # Packages to support plotting
  library(ggspavis)
  library(ggplot2)
  library(patchwork)
})

# To support plotting
library(ggspavis)
library(ggplot2)
library(patchwork)

# Set ggplot2 theme

> theme_set(theme_bw())

Reviewer: Did you want to remove this `theme_set`?

Author: Definitely didn't mean to!

```

Let's also look at some marker gene expression to develop a sense of what cell types we might expect in this data given this reference.

> We'll show expression of select marker genes, obtained taken from the OsteoCAR paper, for cell types in the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll show the expression of select marker genes, taken from the OsteoCAR paper, for cell types in the reference.
```

  ) |> wrap_plots(ncol = 4)
```

Based on these gene expression plots, what cell types do you think are likely common in the dataset?
Uncommon?

> Which cell types do you expect might co-occur?

Reviewer: Just noting that I agree with this order that you have now.

Does this plot give you any insights about the osteosarcoma tumor microenvironment and the level of immune infiltration?

## Perform deconvolution
Next, we'll use this reference to attempt to determine which cell types are present in each spot and their relative abundances in the osteosarcoma sample.

RCTD models spot expression as a weighted combination of cell type-specific expression profiles from the single-cell reference.
RCTD offers three different modes you can use to specify how many cell types to model for each spot:

1. *Doublet mode:*
This mode constrains the RCTD model to infer a maximum of two cell types per spot, which may or may not be realistic for heterogeneous Visium datasets.
We have to note as well, this concept of "doublet" is not the same as doublets in single-cell analysis, in which multiple cells are sequenced together in a single droplet.

> Instead, this means at most two _cell types_ can be present in a spot; the exact number of cells per spot is not known, but we assume it's likely between 5--20.

Reviewer: Personally, I don't think you need these sentences. I think the concept that it's 2 cells per spot is pretty clear from the first sentence. 

```suggestion
```

2. *Multi mode:*
This mode allows the RCTD model to infer multiple cell types per spot, but no more than a specified maximum number of cell types (`max_multi_types`).
This mode is an extension of doublet mode, where the maximum can be raised above 2.
3. *Full mode:*

> This mode does not apply any constraints to the RCTD the model, which is allowed to infer an arbitrary number of cell types per spot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mode does not apply any constraints to the RCTD model, which is allowed to infer an arbitrary number of cell types per spot.
```

> With each mode, we'll ultimately end up with a per-cell weight which we can interpret as a proportion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With each mode, we'll ultimately end up with a per-cell weight which we can interpret as a proportion.
This proportion indicates the estimated contribution of each cell type to each spot. 
```
Just adding one more clarifying sentence about what exactly we mean by per-cell weight and proportion.

> We'll begin running deconvolution by running RCTD in doublet mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I would remove this since there's a whole section of just preparing the data for deconvolution before you actually use doublet mode.

### Prepare the data for deconvolution

Next, we'll prepare the data for deconvolution by running the function `spacexr::createRctd()`.
This function sets various values and parameters that will be used for the deconvolution procedure, including:

> * Identifying genes to use to correct for platform effects

Reviewer: How are these identified? Is this from the reference or a combination of the reference and the SPE. I might add some more context here.

Author: I added some more info to this but tried to not get too into the weeds, aka no big math. Let me know if you think it needs more expansion.

* Identifying differentially expressed genes across cell types in the reference
* Using those differentially expressed genes, calculating a mean-normalized reference expression matrix that RCTD will use for the deconvolution process itself

> We'll leave parameters are their defaults and prepare the data to run deconvolution with `Ann_Level1` labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll leave the parameters at their defaults and prepare the data for deconvolution using `Ann_Level1` labels.
```

  rctd_mode = "doublet",
  # number of cores to use
  max_cores = 4
) 
```

Now that results are ready, we'll have a look:

```{r show rctd_doublet, live = TRUE}
# show rctd_doublet
rctd_doublet
```

The resulting object is a new SPE object with only 5 features; these are not genes, but represent the cell type labels in the reference object. 
This object also has several assays with the main deconvolution results:

* `weights`: Per-spot cell type proportions 
* `weights_full`: Weights from the initial RCTD model fit, before constraining to two cell types
  * Note that these values are not what precisely we would get from running RCTD "full" mode, as the model parameters here were optimized for "doublet" mode
* `weighted_unconfident`: The same as `weights_full`, but including weights that the model is less confident in

The `weights` assay which contains the fitted proportions is of most interest to us:

```{r doublet weights}
# print all rows across the first four columns of the matrix
assay(rctd_doublet, "weights")[, 1:4]
```

This matrix tells us, for example, that the spot barcoded `AACACCTAAGCATTGC-1` is roughly split between epithelial/endothelial and mesenchymal cells.

> This result SPE object also contains some useful information in the `colData` slot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting SPE object also contains some useful information in the `colData` slot:
```

plot_all_props(rctd_doublet)
```

What overall patterns do you see?
Does the cell type distribution match your expectations from our earlier marker gene expression plots?

One specific observation here is this model inferred very few, if any, immune lymphoid cells in the data.
We did however observe limited expression of immune lymphoid cells, so it's possible that by using doublet mode, we have missed identifying rare cell type populations.

Therefore, we'll run RCTD once more but this time in "full" mode, which does not impose any constraints on the number of cell types per spot.

### Perform deconvolution: full mode

> We can use the same `rctd_data` object as input to full mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Perform deconvolution: full mode

We'll run RCTD once more but this time in "full" mode, which does not impose any constraints on the number of cell types per spot.
We can use the same `rctd_data` object as input to full mode:
```

Just reorganizing since I think it makes sense to have the first sentence of this section state what the purpose is, which is to run full mode, before diving into code.
